Impact of Indian Economy due to COVID-19. COVID-19: INTRODUCTIONThe Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19)Initially emerged in China at the end of 2019 and by the end of January2020 The World Health Organization declared this pandemic as a Public HealthEmergency of International Concern. This viruscauses respiratory illness (like the flu) with symptoms such as a cough feverand in more severe cases difficulty in breathing or may cause lung disease.Senior Citizens or people under some medical treatment are more likely toacclimate to this virus.The impact of thisoutbreak is rapidly increasing at a higher rate than anything else in theeconomies of various countries of the world. This outbreak is considered asituation like recession or slowdown of the overall economy after the greatrecession in the year 2008.India is thefifth-largest economy in the world with a population of 133.92 Crores. India isstill in its developing phase and its uneven development across regions andcommunities adds various complexities in coping up with this kind of pandemic.It also reflects that there is a huge scope for social schism among the peopleof different communities.In India the firstcase was reported at the end of January month because people travel from Chinato India. The government of India made special arrangements for the studentsand people who were there in Wuhan for studies and work so that India can savetheir people from the effect of this novel coronavirus. The infection rate ofthis virus is relatively low in India as compared to its population sizebecause of the rapid actions taken by the government to quarantine people andshut borders.Also the governmentof India announces the suspension of various activities in the country likeshut down of educational institutes and corporate houses deferring all touristvisas and postal services cease all the interstate and intrastate borderswithin the country and terminate all the transportation facilities. The driveof social distancing and isolation of infected people also takes place.The initiatives takenby the government of India in accordance with this pandemic outbreak affect theeconomy in a very drastic way. It changes the way in which the country isdeveloping. A lot of disruption is happening all around the nation whichchallenges the ?unimaginably ambitious? aim of the Modi government forachieving ?$5 Trillion Economy? by 2024.COVID-19: ECONOMIC IMPACTThe Indian economy isdeemed as the fastest developing economies in the world. India has now emergedas a global preeminent player in the world?s economies and at the third-largesteconomy in terms of purchasing power parity. It consists of numerous sectors orchannels such as Hospitality Education Retail E-Commerce AviationPetroleum Banking Automobiles Pharma or Healthcare Insurance and Railwaysetc. which are going unfavourably influenced by this disruption and throughwhich the economy is getting affected.COVID-19: HOSPITALITYThe Hotel industry of India has a very vast contribution towards India?s Total Gross Domestic Product. It is the most prominent service sector with market size of $22 Billion in 2019 &amp; the proposed rate of growth by 8.6% till 2025 now becomes a challenge because of this pandemic. The intact turnover of the Indian hospitality sector was sunk between $8.85 billion to $10 billion which reflects depletion of 39% – 45% as correlated to last year?s revenues. The hospitality sector needs to take proactive financial steps to mitigate the impact of COVID 19. It is wholly based on travel trade and tourism for its subsistence or existence. This extensive outbreak leads to huge cancellations of bookings in the last months? leads to the miserable position of hotels in the worrisome declines.Hotels aregrappling from crisis amid stringent government restrictions and alsoemphasizing on isolation and social distancing. The impact is very huge and isunpredictable but the sector is at its maturity level and focusing on theirhospitality commitment to and for the society in the best way they can. The bighotel chains in India propose their rooms and venues for free of cost or atvery highly subsidized rates to the government for the purpose of quarantinepeople who came back from abroad and to the medical fraternity to use rooms asthe isolation infirmaries. Also the pantries are used for preparing feeds forthe needy ones in a proper sanitized manner.The industryprofessionals have to keep an eye on their rivals to check their survivingpolicies at this consequence and they have to sustain their public image in themarket after analysing the after-effects on their pricing and preservation oftheir assets. This industry may exceed after witnessing remarkable assurance inthe economy.COVID-19: EDUCATIONEducation is a pretty essential aspectin an underdeveloped country like India. India?s Education sector proposes aglorious opportunity to 29% of India?s population which is between the ages of0-14 years. There is a foreseen rise in India?s higher education sector of Rs244824 crore by 2025 but as the occurrence of the Virus that?s a troublesomechallenge. The COVID-19 outbreak has set off alarmbells across the country for the 250 million school going students along withstudents enrolled in universities in India. India?s education sector is notunaffected it has given shut down of school Colleges and other institutionsthis is basically for social distancing to prevent the cause-effect of thespreading virus and be precaution beforehand of the disruption. India hasresulted in 49.86% of the increase in internet penetration utilized to remitlearning. So to permeate the pauses the virtual classes and online classes arecatching the drift i.e. a merge turn to the digital learning platform.In the wake of this dilemma andgripping the student safety in mind and their scholarly concern most of theinstitutes have taken the action to accommodate the convenience oftelecommunication Skype call zoom call and admittance to other virtualprospects to fill the gap of learning. The examinations are being suspended orpostponed keeping the concerns of the burgeoning COVID-19 on the massesextensively in the consultation.Undoubtedly this is a very crucialtime for students. Ironically it has taken the COVID-19 outbreak to get thewhole education sector to slip to digital mode and with both humanistic andtechnological support. The impact on education is likely to induce losses interms of dropout rates and learning outcomes especially in regions with low shockresilience.COVID-19: TRAVEL &amp; TOURISMThe Coronavirus outbreak had adebilitating influence on India?s travel and tourism sector with the industryassessing an overall deterioration of ? 5 lakh crore with witnessing a 4-5crore people job cuts. It was also scrutinized that online travel agencies wereset to suffer as much as ? 4312 crores tour operators (inbound anddomestic) ? 25000 crores adventure tour operators nearly ? 19000 crores andcruise tourism ?419 crores. This sector engages employment to the extensivesegment of the civilization like miniature homestays and regular wageearners.The time period from December to May isvery crucial and important for this sector to attract its customers as peoplecome from outside the country in this time span and also people within thecountry travel a lot to spend their summer holidays and also the people whotravel abroad. According to ICC Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTA) has got fluffby about 67% seasonally in January-March while for domestic tourists thevalue is lower by almost 40%.According to The World Economic Forum(WEF) this pandemic is putting up to 50 million jobs in the global Travel andTourism sector at risk and out of this around 30 million would be in Asia.Indian Chamber of Commerce (ICC) counsels fixing up of a ‘Travel &amp; TourismStabilisation Fund’ with direct gain transfer to each unit to preventcommercial loss and sequential job loss. It is presumed that it would take upto 10 months for the tourism sector to get back to its sustainable level.Travel and Tourism sector bodies hadcommunicated to the government for interim aid to pay EMIs instalments taxesand salaries to operators as the tourism industry is eyeing destitutioncessation of industries and mass lay-off. The unskilled people of the industryare perceived as the most vulnerable link in the whole industry concatenation.COVID-19: BANKING &amp; FINANCIALThe Indian Banking sector has aninfluential pivotal role in the development of an economy as it is considered anecessary service sector in society. India?s banking sector is sufficientlycapitalized and well regulated by the regulatory body The Reserve Bank of India(RBI). Currently Indian banking and financial industry is at the fifth-largestin the world and has the potential to become third-largest by 2024 andcontributing approx 7.7% towards the GDP of India. Although the banking andfinancial sector were previously suffering a lot and are on the strugglingplank because of scams like Nirav Modi VUCA disruptions like demonetizationthe enlightenment of GST in the nation and now with this pandemic.This disruption causes so many problemsto the retail as well as corporate customers. Indian Banking Association saidto bank customers that they should visit the bank branches only in thesituation of extreme emergency. The Bank branch cut-offs the working hours in aday. Many branches were sanitized under the orders of the state government andthe services are kept limited which are most essential in the branches. RBIasked customers to use digital platforms for most of the operations and banksare operating round-the-clock to assure all digital channels are up to date.However an appropriate fiscal policyresponse should be implemented to uplift the economy from drowsiness to avigorous state. From boosting bank?s liquidity to providing financial relief toits customers RBI announced various guidelines to stabilize the concern ofcorporate houses as well as MSMEs and retail customers in the wake of thisoutbreak.Banks are now being allowed for a threemonths moratorium on payment of instalments regarding all term loans prominentas on 01.03.2020. Also the repayment schedule and tenure of such loans can beshifted by 3 months. Further to tackle financially this industry and itsvaluable customers the RBI also slashed the repo rate by 75 basis points.COVID-19: CONCLUSIONThe Government of India mobilized various committees or task force specifically for COVID-19 and National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)to overcome from this pandemic. These committees are here to ensure a harmonized response against this outbreak. The government took all necessary steps to fight against the coronavirus such as introducing a new app for the population named as ?AAROGYA SETU APP? which gives essential information about the virus. Such crises also heal the earth back to its natural state with fewer disruptions by humans. It could also be stated that such crises also seed some opportunities in the nation for the better development of the whole economy.