Blockchain in Fintech. Disruption in Fintech ? The Lightning NetworkBlockchain or the Distributed Ledger Technology hasalready been around for some time now. Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin based onthe Blockchain technology are making entry into the formal finance world andincreasingly becoming a medium for exchange. Though there are many potentialuse cases for Cryptocurrencies and the Indian Government is very critical aboutimplementing the technology in banking and finance it still has a lot ofissues to be resolved before we can commercially use it for transactions. Some of the most important drawbacks ofCryptocurrencies like Bitcoin right now are as below:Scalability:Bitcoin can have &lt;7 transactions per second as compared to ~47000 via payment network giants like VisaThere is a block limit of 1MB which amounts to 8GBs per 10 min on a Bitcoin block (to match 47000 transactions per second). This essentially means that home computers cannot process this currently and it has very limited use cases with transactions requiring devices having the high computational powerCentralization:High computation power requirement would limit the usage of the network to only those who can afford itThis will eventually lead to fewer validations for the Distributed Ledger defeating the whole purpose of using Blockchain. (A distributed ledger means that everyone in the network can validate the transaction between two parties)So it becomes important to have a cheaply availablevalidation mechanism that can be carried out using a basic broadband connectionin-home/small business computers. If two people have personal transactionhistory it’s unimportant that it should be posted on the main blockchain everytime a transaction takes place as it could bloat up the blockchain. Moreovereveryday transactions using cryptocurrency is not possible as the cost ofposting a transaction for. Let’s say buying a coffee can be more than theprice of coffee itself.Introducing The Lightning Network:Lightning Network is the latest disruptive technologybeing researched currently in Fintech to make cryptocurrencies scalable. Itbasically addsan extra layer on top of the main Bitcoin Blockchain and enables paymentchannels between two parties over this layer. Micropayments for everydaytransactions can be very easily carried out using this channel. Here is how itworks:Suppose A buys a coffeefrom the nearby coffee shop B daily on her way to work. A and B decide to opena channel on the Blockchain for their everyday transactions. Once the channel(or the Lightning Network) is open the two parties can keep a track of theirdaily transactions on this ledger. At the end of the month with the ledgerreflecting balances left with each party they decide to close the channel.This final transaction is then recorded on the main Bitcoin Blockchain. Thisreduces the cost of the transaction and enables micropayments for everydaytransactions. Micropayment channels can defer updating the mainblockchain with remaining balances at a later date. A large network ofmicropayments can be created as a secondary layer on top of the main blockchainto address the scalability issue and reduce transaction fees. Although this solutionis very much in the initial stages resolving the scalability issue andreducing transaction fees by taking the transaction out of the main blockchainwill give a big boost to the use of Cryptocurrencies.How do payments take place on the lightning network?The two parties exchange a single key for validationof their spend transactions. They can conduct an unlimited number of transactionson this channel and finally when one party closes the channel the balanceswill be added to the blockchain.Eachuser can open a digital wallet to store Bitcoins and deposit some coins in itonce the channel is opened (this money is kind of a security deposit on behalfof both the parties to honor their transaction)Oncethey need to exchange money after their books are updated they can sign offthe ledger in the channelFinallythis will be added to the blockchain once the channel is closedThe network is globally scalable since to reach anyperson through connected channels network you just need to know the path toconnect to that person through leveraging your existing network. Once thenetwork develops in future the requirement to open a separate channel toowould cease to exist since the algorithm will automatically find the shortestroute to connect to the person whom you want to pay based on the exhaustivepeer to peer network. This would ease inter-country transactions and money canbe sent across internationally within seconds.Limitations of the technology –Since the channel for Lightning Network is separate and not connected with the main Blockchain it will not be backed by the security of the original Blockchain. This can be a major concern for its widespread adoption and the companies should research extensively into this. Another challenge is its dependency on the internet. The Lightning Network is not capable of storing coins digitally in a hardware wallet. This makes it prone to hackers since the wallet will be available online. Also transferring large amounts of money is something that needs further detailed research since bigger payment might struggle with routing in the network.Nevertheless this technology is really fascinating and has a very broad usage through the implementation of Bitcoins and Distributed Ledger in everyday life. Once this is rolled out for customer experience micropayments will be possible between two parties on Blockchain just as we currently have wallets to transfer money for small purchases. The Lightning Network has a long way to go and is surely going to become the next big disruption in Fintech domain after Blockchain.